+++
title = "The Metaphysical Deduction of the Categories"
publishDate = 2018-09-11T00:00:00-04:00
tags = ["categories", "metaphysics", "judgment", "logic", "understanding"]
draft = true
weight = 0
toc = true
type = "post"
+++

Kant's aim in the so-called "Metaphysical Deduction" (see B159) is to
argue that, of the a priori concepts we have available to us some are
more fundamental than others. These are the concepts Kant calls the
"categories." Thus, the basic question that Kant seeks to answer is the
question of *which* a priori concepts serve as the fundamental concepts
of metaphysical theorizing. The MD provides what Kant calls a "clue" (or
more literally a "*Leitfaden*" or "guiding thread") to the discovery of
these concepts. The MD has three sections. These consist of (i) an
introduction where the notion of a "logical use" of the faculty of
concepts or the "understanding" is set out; (ii) an elaboration of the
different logical forms of judgment and a corresponding table of those
forms; (iii) an explication of the categories as a priori concepts that
correspond to the various logical forms of the table as set out in (ii).

## The Pre-Critical Strategy

In Kant's "Inaugural Dissertation" of 1770 (whose formal title is "On
the Forms and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible World") he
lays out a theory of the manner in which the structure of the rational
human mind governs the kinds of things it can know of reality. In many
ways this work anticipates positions and arguments Kant provides in the
*Critique of Pure Reason*. And like that latter work, in the ID Kant
seeks to delimit the fundamental concepts of metaphysics (though he does
not call them categories) via an analysis of the faculty of
understanding (or "intellect" more broadly). He says,

> the concepts met with in metaphysics are not to be sought in the
> senses but in the very nature of the pure understanding, and that not
> as innate concepts but as concepts abstracted from the laws inherent
> in the mind (by attending to its actions on the occasion of an
> experience), and therefore as acquired concepts. (ID §8, 2:395; see
> also ID Corollary, 2:406 and ID §23, 2:411)

Here Kant articulates (or perhaps "gestures at" is more accurate) his
view of how the concepts of metaphysics, through which we think of the
intelligible world, are acquired. They are acquired by attending to the
actions of the mind in course of its having experience. Here it is
important for Kant's project in the *Dissertation*, as it will be for
his project in the *Critique of Pure Reason*, that his account of the
acquisition of the concepts of metaphysics not run afoul of his
characterization of those concepts as "intellectual" rather than
"empirical" or "sensitive."[^fn:1] For this reason they cannot be
concepts abstracted from sensible intuition, in the manner that our
concepts of space and time are. In such a case those concepts would be
(merely) empirical or "sensitive on account of their genesis" (ID §5,
2:393). Instead, the concepts of metaphysics are supposed to be "given
in a fundamental fashion by the pure understanding itself" (ID §23,
2:411). There is, however, some question as to whether, in the
*Dissertation* or in lectures immediately subsequent to its publication,
Kant in fact succeeds in providing an account of the acquisition of such
concepts consistent with his stricture on their intellectual provenance.

The account of the *Dissertation* puts pressure on Kant to provide some
story as to how we can come to be aware of the mind and its acts, and on
what basis this awareness constitutes the acquisition of a non-sensory
concept. At this point in his career, Kant has not yet articulated his
doctrine of "pure" apperception as distinct from inner sense (more on
this in the next set of notes). So it looks as if, given his distinction
between intuition and concept and their related faculties, that it must
be an inner intuition that accounts for the acquisition of the concepts
of metaphysics. However, if it *is* inner intuition that is the basis
for such acquisition, it looks like Kant will run afoul of his
requirement that the concepts of metaphysics be intellectual as opposed
to empirical (for even the "pure" concepts of space and time, though
free of sensation, are nevertheless sensitive on this account (ID §5,
2:393)).

Perhaps Kant thinks we have a special *intellectual* intuition of the
mind and its acts? One recent commentator (Dyck 2016) has argued that
Kant is committed in the *Dissertation* to our having intellectual
intuitions of our own minds and that he only subsequently, in the later
70s, rejects this position in favor of one according to which it is
inner *sense*---and thus empirical psychology---that provides the
requisite basis for acquiring metaphysical concepts. Dyck's argument
concerning Kant's position in the *Dissertation* hinges on two claims.
First, that there are clear texts showing that Kant denies that sensible
laws (i.e. of time and space) apply to immaterial substances, including
the mind/soul (2016, 330). Second, that Kant's conception of the
acquisition of the pure concepts of metaphysics depends on the existence
of intellectual intuition of the mind or soul itself (2016, 330--1).
However, neither of these interpretive points are particularly
compelling. Against the first, it is relatively clear from the context
of Kant's statements regarding immaterial substance that he denies that
the principles of the *corporeal* world apply to such substances (ID
§27, 2:414). That would mean that principles belonging to substances
understood as *bodies* do not apply to the mind. But this is compatible
with the conception of the mind as nevertheless governed by other
sensible principles, and in particular, by time. Against Dyck's second
point, in the *Dissertation* Kant explicitly states that finite beings
lack intellectual intuition (ID §10, 2:396-7) and that "the accidents
which are not included in the relations of space, such as the thoughts
of the mind" are in time (ID Corollary, 2:406). It thus seems unlikely
that Kant holds in the *Dissertation* that metaphysical concepts are
acquired via intellectual intuition, on pain of explicitly contradicting
himself at multiple points.[^fn:2]

But even if Kant does not directly contradict himself in the
*Dissertation*, Dyck's discussion helps point us to a clear tension and
perhaps fatal ambiguity in Kant's pre-critical view. One might,
therefore, have hope that Kant's remarks in lectures and notes
subsequent to the publication of the *Dissertation* might clarify his
position. However, the lecture texts we have from the 1770s only make
matters more complicated. For example, in lectures shortly after the
*Dissertation* Kant says, "We have no intuition in the whole world
except the intuition of our self; all other things are appearances"
(*Anthropologie Collins* 25:15 (1772-3)). Kant's point here is *not*
that we have only one intuition---viz. of ourselves. Rather, it is that
all of our *outer* intuitions are of appearances, while our inner (and
non-intellectual!) intuitions present ourselves as *substantial
subjects*. In a reflexion also from the early-to-mid 1770s Kant says
that "The I is the intuition of a substance" (R4493, 17:571 (1772-5)).
In the *Metaphysics L<sub>1</sub>* lectures, from roughly the same
period, Kant contrasts consciousness of external objects with
consciousness of the self. One intuits oneself immediately, but the same
is not true of external objects (28:206-7, 224). The self (as
intelligence) so intuited is substantial, simple, and immaterial
(28:224-5).

In a note (R4674) from the *Duisberg Nachlass* of 1775-6, Kant writes
that an (external) object may be represented only "according to its
relations", i.e., only according to the properties, and relations
between those properties, that are presented in sense experience.[^fn:3]
And, as he does in the lecture material cited above, Kant *contrasts*
our position with respect to intuition of external objects with the
special access we have to ourselves. The inner intuition of oneself is
of an object whose properties are not presented, as outer things are,
merely in terms of relations.[^fn:4] The language Kant uses in R4674 is
also echoed in other texts from the mid-70s, For example, Kant states
that the 'I' is the "original concept" of substance which we "borrow"
for use in our conception of other substances (*Metaphysics
L<sub>1</sub>*, 28:225-6). Relatedly, he remarks that "the I expresses
the substantial; for that substrate in which all accidents inhere is the
substantial. This is the only case where we can immediately intuit the
substance" (*Pölitz Metaphysik* 28:226 (1777-80)).

The view that emerges from these texts, and that may in fact already be
present in Kant's *Dissertation*, is one according to which inner sense
provides a privileged epistemic relation to oneself. In inner sense one
is presented not merely as a set of relations, as in outer sense, but as
a *subject* of properties, as what Kant sometimes describes as an
intelligence or "thinking substance" (e.g. *Metaphysics L<sub>1</sub>*
28:224-5). The self is thus the "original of all objects" in the sense
that, as Allison Laywine puts it, "we somehow transfer our
representations of the one true subject and apply it derivatively or by
analogy to our thought of anything else."[^fn:5]

Unfortunately, Kant never clarifies how this position concerning the
privileged and peculiar role of inner sense is consistent with his
general doctrine of sensible intuition, or how it is consistent with the
*Dissertation's* position that no pure intellectual concept can be
derived from the content of sensible intuition. The overall impression
of Kant's position based on his remarks in the Dissertation, and
subsequently in the lectures, is that of a steadfast commitment to
roughly the following position. Introspection provides a form of
intuitive acquaintance with the self as a metaphysical subject, and it
is via this acquaintance that we can then form by analogy the
representations of objects (construed as metaphysical subjects of
properties) distinct from us. But how this position is ultimately
supposed to cohere with Kant's other commitments in the 70s is, at best,
unclear. It in facts seems a reasonably suspicion that Kant's various
commitments in the 70s *don't* cohere, and that this resulting tension
in his view is part of what pushes him towards the critical distinction
between inner intuition and pure apperception. We'll talk about this
distinction further when we discuss the argument of the Transcendental
Deduction. In the next section I talk about Kant's revision of his
*Dissertation* strategy in then argument of the MD.

## The Logical & Real Uses of the Understanding {#the-logical-and-real-uses-of-the-understanding}

In the *Dissertation* Kant distinguishes between what he terms the
"logical" and the "real" uses of the understanding (ID §23, 2:410--11).
He says,

> in pure philosophy, such as metaphysics, the use of the understanding
> in dealing with principles is real; that is to say, the fundamental
> concepts of things and of relations, and the axioms themselves, are
> given in a fundamental fashion by the pure understanding itself; and,
> since they are not intuitions, they are not immune to error.

In the first *Critique* Kant maintains the view that the concepts of
metaphysics come from the understanding. However, he significantly
alters the method by which these concepts are derived. Specifically he
now closely links the categories with the logical forms of judgment. The
latter are not just a "clue" to the organization of the table of
categories, they *are* the categories, at least in their "logical" use.
The central texts making this plain are as follows.

> The same understanding, therefore, and indeed by means of the very
> same actions through which it brings the logical form of a judgment
> into concepts...also brings a transcendental content into its
> representations by means of the synthetic unity of the manifold in
> intuition in general...(MD §10, B105)
>
> \[The categories\] are concepts of an object in general, by means of
> which its intuition is regarded as determined with regard to one of
> the logical functions for judgments. (TD Transition, B128)
>
> That action of the understanding...through which the manifold of given
> representations (whether they be intuitions or concepts) is brought
> under an apperception in general, is the logical function of
> judgments. ... But now the categories are nothing other than these
> very functions for judging, insofar as the manifold of a given
> intuition is determined with regard to them (TD §20, B143)
>
> In the metaphysical deduction the origin of the a priori categories in
> general was established through their complete coincidence \[*völlige
> Zusammentreffung*\] with the universal logical functions of thinking
> (TD §26, B159)
>
> the pure concepts of the understanding are, of themselves, nothing but
> logical functions, but that as such they do not constitute the least
> concept of an object in itself but rather need sensory intuition as a
> basis, and even then they serve only to determine empirical judgments
> (Pr §39, 4:324)

These texts communicate two important points. First, they indicate
Kant's pursuit of a strategy for explaining how the pure categories, or
fundamental concepts of metaphysics, arise from the intellect. This
strategy avoids commitment to any form of content nativism, and it
avoids the problem that we saw plagued Kant's account in the
*Dissertation*---viz. explaining how the pure categories are "pure" in
the sense of being traceable only to the intellect, without thereby
implicating either intellectual intuition, which he denies, or sensible
(inner) intuition, which would undermine their claim to purity.

Pursuit of this strategy means that, second, the very logical functions
for combining representations (concepts) in judgment, and which
constitute the basis of study in what Kant calls "pure general logic",
are also the functions for combining representations (intuitions) in our
experience of objects. Thus for the understanding as a faculty of
judging (A69/B94), each logical function of thinking (e.g. categorical
judgment), when applied to a multiplicity of intuitions, results in a
distinctive way of relating to, or "experiencing" in Kant's technical
sense, an object e.g. a substance.

Thus, Kant has a much more coherent strategy than he did in the
*Dissertation* for explaining how we come to grasp the a priori concepts
necessary for doing metaphysics. The notion that we can analyze our
logic and determine which are the basic logical forms is plausible and
does not require appealing to some privileged access we might have to
ourselves in introspection (i.e. inner sense).

However, for this strategy to ultimately succeed, Kant must provide
substantial arguments for several controversial claims. First, he must
show that he has successfully given a complete analysis of the logical
forms of judgment; second, he must show that the metaphysical concepts
derived from these logical forms (i.e. the categories) really provide
the complete basis for doing metaphysics; third, he must show that the
content of the categories does not include material absent from the
purely logical forms -- if there were such "extra" content in the
categories, then it is not clear how they are supposed to be "identical"
with the logical forms, as Kant sometimes indicates that they are.

## References {#references}

<div id="refs" class="references">
  <div></div>


<div id="ref-allison2004-ch6">
  <div></div>

Allison, Henry E. 2004. "The Intellectual Conditions of Human Cognition:
Kant's Metaphysical Deduction." In, 133--56. New Haven: Yale University
Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-allison2015">
  <div></div>

---------. 2015. *Kant's Transcendental Deduction: An
Analytical-Historical Commentary*. New York: Oxford University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-carl1989">
  <div></div>

Carl, Wolfgang. 1989a. *Der Schweigende Kant: Die Entwürfe zu einer
Deduktion der Kategorien vor 1781*. Vol. 182. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht.

</div>

<div id="ref-carl1989a">
  <div></div>

---------. 1989b. "Kant's First Drafts of the Deduction of the
Categories." In *Kant's Transcendental Deductions*, edited by Eckart
Förster, 3--20. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-dyck2016">
  <div></div>

Dyck, Corey W. 2016. "The Scope of Inner Sense: The Development of
Kant's Psychology in the Silent Decade." *Con-Textos Kantianos* 3:
1--19.

</div>

<div id="ref-engstromforthcoming">
  <div></div>

Engstrom, Stephen. n.d. "The Category of Substance." *Logical Analysis
and History of Philosophy* 21.

</div>

<div id="ref-gardner1999">
  <div></div>

Gardner, Sebastian. 1999. *Kant and the Critique of Pure Reason*.
London: Routledge.

</div>

<div id="ref-greenberg1994">
  <div></div>

Greenberg, Robert. 1994. "The Content of Kant's Logical Functions of
Judgment." *History of Philosophy Quarterly* 11 (4): 375--92.

</div>

<div id="ref-guyer1987">
  <div></div>

Guyer, Paul. 1987. *Kant and the Claims of Knowledge*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-guyer2014">
  <div></div>

---------. 2014. *Kant*. London: Routledge.

</div>

<div id="ref-kitcher2011">
  <div></div>

Kitcher, Patricia. 2011. *Kant's Thinker*. New York: Oxford University
Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-klemme1996">
  <div></div>

Klemme, Heiner F. 1996. *Kants Philosophie des Subjekts: Systematische
und entwicklungsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen zum Verhältnis von
Selbstbewusstsein und Selbsterkenntnis*. Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag.

</div>

<div id="ref-langton1998">
  <div></div>

Langton, Rae. 1998. *Kantian Humility: Our Ignorance of Things in
Themselves*. Oxford University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-langton2006">
  <div></div>

---------. 2006. "Kant's Phenomena: Extrinsic or Relational Properties?
A Reply to Allais." *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research* 73 (1):
170--85.

</div>

<div id="ref-laywine2005">
  <div></div>

Laywine, Alison. 2005. "Kant on the Self as Model of Experience."
*Kantian Review* 9 (1): 1--29.

</div>

<div id="ref-laywine2006">
  <div></div>

---------. 2006. "Kant's Metaphysical Reflections in the Duisburg
Nachlass." *Kant Studien* 97 (1).

</div>

<div id="ref-longuenesse1998">
  <div></div>

Longuenesse, Béatrice. 1998. *Kant and the Capacity to Judge*.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-longuenesse2006a">
  <div></div>

---------. 2006. "Kant on a Priori Concepts: The Metaphysical Deduction
of the Categories." In, edited by Paul Guyer, 129--68.

</div>

<div id="ref-lovejoy1907">
  <div></div>

Lovejoy, Arthur O. 1907. "Kant's Classification of the Forms of
Judgment." *The Philosophical Review* 16 (6): 588--603.

</div>

<div id="ref-mclear2017">
  <div></div>

McLear, Colin. 2017. "Motion and the Affection Argument." *Synthese*,
1--17.

</div>

<div id="ref-mohr1995">
  <div></div>

Mohr, Georg. 1995. "Freedom and the Self: From Introspection to
Intersubjectivity: Wolff, Kant, and Fichte." In, edited by Karl Ameriks
and Dieter Sturma, 31--45. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-nussbaum2008">
  <div></div>

Nussbaum, Charles. 2008. "Concepts, Judgments, and Unity in Kant's
Metaphysical Deduction of the Relational Categories." *Journal of the
History of Philosophy* 28 (1): 89--103.

</div>

<div id="ref-pereboom1991">
  <div></div>

Pereboom, Derk. 1991. "Kant's Amphiboly." *Archiv für Geschichte der
Philosophie* 73 (1): 50--70.

</div>

<div id="ref-pereboom2006">
  <div></div>

---------. 2006. "Kant's Metaphysical and Transcendental Deductions." In
*A Companion to Kant*, edited by Graham Bird, 154--68. Blackwell
Publishing.

</div>

<div id="ref-reich1992">
  <div></div>

Reich, Klaus. 1992. *The Completeness of Kant's Table of Judgments*.
Stanford University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-serck-hanssen2001">
  <div></div>

Serck-Hanssen, Camilla. 2001. "Apperception and Deduction in the
Duisburgischer Nachlass." *Kant und die Berliner Aufklärung: Akten des
IX. Internationalen Kant-Kongresses* 2: 59--68.

</div>

<div id="ref-wuerth2014">
  <div></div>

Wuerth, Julian. 2014. *Kant on Mind, Action, and Ethics*. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

</div>

</div>

[^fn:1]: What are the "concepts of metaphysics" for Kant? Certainly they
    include the concept `<God>`, as well as `<soul>` and `<world>`.
    These all presuppose possession of the concept <substance>.
    Presumably also on the list are other concepts one would find in,
    e.g., Baumgarten's *Metaphysica*, such as `<possibility>`,
    `<necessity>`, `<accident>`, and so forth.

[^fn:2]: For consideration of the problem of self-consciousness in the
    1770s more broadly, as well as Kant's rejection of intellectual
    intuition, see (Klemme 1996, 118--26). As (Mohr 1995, 32--36) points
    out, Kant does speak of an intellectual (not inner) intuition of
    freedom in *reflexionen* from the early-to-mid-1770s (e.g. R4336
    17:509 (1769-75)) But Kant also speaks of apperception as opposed to
    intuition in the mid-1770s (e.g. R4723 17:688 (1773-5); R6860 19:183
    (1776?-91?)). It is clear that he is struggling to express the
    nature of the awareness we can have, as rational beings, of our own
    activity (e.g. R4220 17:462 (1769-70)).

[^fn:3]: For discussion of Kant's view that the objects of sense consist
    entirely of relations, or relational properties, see (Pereboom 1991;
    Langton 1998, 2006; McLear 2017).

[^fn:4]: There is also indication in the *Duisburg Nachlaß*, as there
    was in Kant's lectures, of his endorsement of the rational
    psychology he would later come to criticize. For example, in the
    *Nachlaß* Kant says that "I would not represent anything as outside
    of me and thus make appearance into experience (objectively) if the
    representations did not relate to something *that is parallel to my
    I*, through which I refer them from myself to another subject"
    (R4675, 17:648 (1775); my emphasis). For discussion see (Guyer 1987;
    Carl 1989b, 1989a; Serck-Hanssen 2001; Laywine 2005, 2006; Kitcher
    2011).

[^fn:5]: (Laywine 2005, 9); see also (Carl 1989a, 182:91--92, 97;
    Kitcher 2011, 73--74; Wuerth 2014, 104; Dyck 2016, 335--8). For
    criticism of Carl's, and to a lesser degree Laywine's, position see
    (Allison 2015, 121--30).
